Title: AI Model Extraction Attacks: Bypassing Single-Client Assumptions in Defenses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03381v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:06:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# AI Model Extraction Attacks: Bypassing Single-Client Assumptions in Defenses 

Maxime Schwarzer 1,2, Johannes F. Loevenich 1,3, Gustavo S´ anchez 2, Laurin Holz 1,4,Thies M¨ ohlenhof 1,5, Tobias H¨ urten 1, Roberto Rigolin F. Lopes 1, and Veit Hagenmeyer 2

> 1

CortAIx Labs, Thales Deutschland, Ditzingen, Germany 

> 2

Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics (IAI), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany 

> 3

Department of Mathematics/Computer Science, University of Osnabr¨ uck, Osnabr¨ uck, Germany 

> 4

Department of Computer Science, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany 

> 5

Department of Computer Science, University Koblenz-Landau, Koblenz, Germany Email: {maxime.schwarzer, johannes.loevenich, roberto.rigolin }@thalesgroup.com, {sanchez, veit.hagenmeyer }@kit.edu 

Abstract —Ensuring the protection of Artificial Intelligence (AI) models deployed in military Command and Control (C2) systems and critical infrastructure is essential for maintaining information superiority. Model Extraction Attacks (MEAs) pose a significant threat, as they enable adversaries to replicate proprietary models, compromise protected information, and prepare offline adversarial attacks. However, current defense strategies predominantly rely on the Single Client Assumption (SCA), which is the implicit assumption that attacks originate from isolated identities. This work systematically demonstrates that the SCA is fundamentally invalid in the presence of coordinated threat actors, such as Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs). We introduce a modular, open-source framework called CerberusAI for reproducible model-stealing research, and use it to simulate distributed attack scenarios. Our empirical evaluation shows that well-established defense mechanisms, such as Protecting Against Deep Neural Network Model Stealing Attacks (PRADA), can be bypassed by basic round-robin query distribution strategies, resulting in a significant reduction in detection performance. Furthermore, we demonstrate that even global aggregation approaches can be rendered operationally useless through adaptive traffic mixing . These results highlight the need for a paradigm shift towards stateful, identity-independent defense architectures in the field of model extraction attacks. This paper was originally presented at the International Conference on Military Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS), organized by the Information Systems Technology (IST) Scientific and Technical Committee, IST-224-RSY – the ICMCIS, held in Bath, United Kingdom, 12-13 May 2026. 

Index Terms —Model Extraction Attacks, Distributed Adversar-ial Attacks, Critical Infrastructure, Artificial Intelligence Security 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Modern military units and operators of critical infrastructure increasingly rely on Artificial intelligence (AI) models as integral components of mission-critical systems, ranging from cyber defense platforms and energy grid management to tactical Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) services and autonomous sensing architectures [1], [2]. Recent investigations on Software Defined Defence (SDD) [3] identify software as a primary capability driver for future multi-domain operations. As a consequence, military systems must be rapidly adaptable, resilient, and securely updatable across their entire lifecycle. In such highly connected, data-driven operational environments, AI models become both strategic enablers and attractive targets for adversaries. A critical yet often underestimated threat to these models is the Model Extraction Attack (MEA), in which malicious network nodes attempt to replicate the target AI model. Through systematic querying, an adversary can reconstruct a proprietary model’s decision boundary [4], enabling the theft of sensitive confidential information and facilitating downstream attacks such as adversarial evasion of deployed Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) [5]. Within military contexts, such model extractions directly undermine the SDD goals of rapid capability evolution and secure deployment pipelines by exposing the underlying AI components to manipulation or replication. Current MEA defense mechanisms, however, rely heavily on the Single Client Assumption (SCA), i.e., the hypothesis that malicious activity originates from a single, isolated client. Defenses such as Protecting Against DNN Model Stealing Attacks (PRADA) [6], Query Unlearning (QUEEN) [7] and Model-Guardian [8] operate by identifying anomalous request patterns on a per-client basis. Yet the SDD paradigm explicitly anticipates highly networked, federated environments with diverse clients, shared middleware layers, and modular AI services distributed across platforms. In such settings, whether in a tactical edge network or a distributed smart city architecture, adversaries with sufficient resources can trivially distribute their probing across many coordinated clients, rendering SCA-based defenses ineffective. This discrepancy between theoretical assumptions and operational threat realities highlights a structural security gap: current defenses do not align with the security requirements of detecting coordinated, adaptive attack patterns in globally aggregated data streams. Addressing this gap is essential for enabling trustworthy AI components in SDD architectures, particularly where AI agents support time-critical decisions, Autonomous Cyber Defence (ACD), or cross-platform analytics in federated defense and infrastructure 

> arXiv:2606.03381v1 [cs.CR] 2 Jun 2026

networks. Therefore, this paper discusses the fundamental flaw in the underlying assumption itself and introduce an open-source framework for evaluating realistic, distributed, and adaptive MEA threats. Our main contributions are: 1) Systematic demonstration of SCA vulnerability : Using PRADA as a representative mechanism, we show how coordinated, distributed query strategies reduce detection performance to zero. 2) Analysis of the limits of global defenses : We demon-strate that even naive global request aggregation fails once attackers embed malicious probes into legitimate background traffic, mirroring mixed operational traffic in SDD-enabled mission networks. 3) Introduction of the open-source framework : The mod-ular, open-source framework CerberusAI for simulating distributed, adaptive MEA scenarios aligned with SDD-relevant deployment architectures. We argue that, by uncovering this structural weakness, future research must move beyond isolated-client analyses and towards robust, learning-enabled security architectures that can recognize advanced forms of coordinated adversarial behavior. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II highlights the relevance of the topic for military applications and cyber operations. Section III provides an overview of related work and the current state of the art. In Section IV, we derive the theoretical vulnerability of the single client assumption, after which Section V introduces the developed CerberusAI framework. Section VI presents the empirical evaluation of the attack scenarios. The paper concludes with a summary and an outlook on future research areas in Section VII. II. R ELEVANCE FOR NATO The integration of AI into North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military capabilities, ranging from autonomous and unmanned systems to decision-support and IDS in federated tactical networks, fundamentally reshapes the Alliance’s operational and security landscape. As emphasized in NATO’s Revised AI Strategy, AI has become a general-purpose and dual-use technology whose military adoption must be accompanied by robust safeguards to ensure reliability, governability, and resilience against adversarial interference. Protecting deployed AI models is therefore not merely atechnical concern, but a prerequisite for sustaining information superiority, operational trust, and interoperability across Allied forces. Within this strategic context, MEAs represent a critical and under-addressed threat to NATO’s AI readiness. Beyond the loss of sensitive Intellectual Property (IP) and the associated risk of privacy leakage from training data, a successfully extracted model provides adversaries with an operational testbed for systematic exploitation. Possession of a functional replica of a military AI component enables the offline development and validation of tailored evasion strategies, allowing AI-enabled detection and decision systems to be bypassed during operations without observable interaction with the protected system. Such adversarial use of AI directly contradicts NATO’s objectives to protect innovation, manage AI-related risks, and ensure the responsible and secure deployment of AI-enabled capabilities. Existing defense approaches for protecting AI models largely originate from civilian contexts and implicitly rely on assumptions that do not hold in NATO-relevant threat environments. In particular, client-centric anomaly detection mechanisms presuppose isolated attackers and benign opera-tional conditions, whereas NATO must assume coordinated, well-resourced, and adaptive adversaries operating at scale. Advanced Persistent Threats can distribute probing activities across large infrastructures and blend malicious behavior into legitimate traffic, rendering identity-based and purely statistical defenses ineffective. This mismatch between prevailing defense assumptions and realistic adversarial capabilities undermines NATO’s ambition to establish a credible Alliance-wide AI Testing, Evaluation, Verification, and Validation landscape capable of addressing emerging threats. By systematically demonstrating the failure of single-client defenses under coordinated attack conditions and by providing a modular framework for realistic red teaming of AI systems, this work directly supports NATO’s strategic goals of protecting AI technologies, strengthening cyber resilience, and improving the Alliance’s understanding of adversarial AI use. The presented approach contributes to the development of reproducible testing methodologies aligned with NATO’s emphasis on responsible AI adoption, threat-informed evaluation, and the protection of AI-enabled capabilities throughout their operational lifecycle. III. R ELATED WORK 

A. Model Extraction Attacks (MEA) 

Research on MEA has developed rapidly in recent years, with a constant arms race between new attack strategies and corresponding defense mechanisms. The goal of MEA is to create a functionally equivalent substitute for a proprietary target model by systematically querying its interface. For example, the pioneering work showed early on that even simple query strategies can replicate target models with high precision [9]. To increase efficiency and reduce costs, subsequent work developed active learning strategies that selectively query data points expected to maximize information gain [4], [10]. While early attacks often relied on the availability of similar data sets [6], more recent work on data-free attacks [11], [12] has demonstrated that attackers can be successful even without domain knowledge by using synthetic data generation. This development suggests that the barriers for attackers are continuously decreasing while the complexity of attacks is increasing. B. Defense Strategies and the Single Client Assumption 

Countermeasures can generally be classified as either passive (e.g., watermarking [13]) or active. Active methods, which aim to detect attacks at runtime, are particularly critical for safeguarding AI models deployed within military communication infrastructures. The most well-known approach for stateful analysis is Protecting Against DNN Model Stealing Attacks (PRADA) [6]. This approach analyzes the distribution of the intervals between successive requests from a client and alerts the user in case of deviations from a characteristic normal distribution. Similar approaches such as QUEEN [7] and Model-Guardian [8] attempt to disrupt the attacker’s gradient estimation by introducing targeted noise into the confidence values. A fundamental shortcoming of these approaches is the implicit SCA. The detection logic usually operates in isolation for each user ID (API key or IP address). However, as indicated by real incidents and the increasing availability of botnets, coordination across distributed identities is a common practice among resource-rich attackers [14]. Initial approaches such as FDINet [15] attempt to detect distributed patterns by analyzing internal model activations. However, these methods are often model-specific, not publicly available, and difficult to transfer to black-box scenarios. 

C. Lack of Standardized Research Frameworks 

A major bottleneck in the advancement of MEA research is the lack of standardized evaluation frameworks that enable meaningful comparison across studies. Experiments are frequently conducted under differing assumptions (threat models, datasets, metrics) and are often implemented using ad hoc scripts. As S´ anchez et al. [16] point out, there is a lack of standardized open-source tools in the field of learning-based system security, particularly in the context of critical infrastructures such as smart grids that enable systematic evaluation. Existing libraries often focus mainly on adversarial examples (e.g., Adversarial Robustness Toolbox) and do not provide integrated environments for simulating complex, distributed MEA scenarios. IV. T HE SINGLE CLIENT ASSUMPTION 

The prevailing strategy for detecting MEA is based on the analysis of query patterns. Methods such as PRADA analyze the statistical distribution of queries (e.g., the intervals between consecutive queries) to identify deviations from benign behavior. These approaches rely on an implicit but critical assumption: the Single Client Assumption (SCA). In this section, we formalize why this assumption is likely to fail in realistic threat scenarios, particularly in the context of military cyber defense against Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs). The fallacy of the SCA is illustrated in Figure 1. Existing literature often assumes a single attacking entity that generates the entirety of the malicious query load, inevitably causing Distributed attack  

> ...
> Defense Logic
> Calculate Client-based Metric
> Attack scenario in research
> IP attacker 1
> IP benign user
> IP attacker 1
> IP attacker N
> IP benign user
> Target Model
> yes no
> many attacking identities (red) bypass defense because of the single client assumption
> Stolen Model
> GOAL:
> steal target model
> with a single attacker,
> attacks are correctly
> recognized
> Over threshold?
> Benign Attack

Fig. 1: Visualization of the SCA fallacy. Right: Defense recognizes attack by a single attacking identity. Left: An attacker bypasses the defense by distributing the attack over N

attacking identities. Since the defense calculates client-based metrics, each attacker remains below the detection threshold. the client-based metrics to exceed the detection threshold τ

(right). In contrast, the left side demonstrates a distributed attack scenario: Here, the global query volume required to steal the model is partitioned across N attacking identities. Since the defense logic evaluates each client in isolation, the metric for each individual attacker remains below the threshold. As a result, the malicious queries are classified as benign, allowing the attackers to successfully construct a stolen model. 

A. Formalization of the Distributed Attacker 

A MEA requires a set of queries Q = {q1, . . . , q K } to train a substitute model S that resembles the target model T . A client-based defense mechanism D monitors a stream of queries q

from a client c and triggers an alarm when a metric M exceeds a threshold τ :

D(Qc) = 

(

1 ( alarm ), if M (Qc) > τ 

0 ( benign ), otherwise , (1) where Qc ⊆ Q is the subset of requests sent by client c.However, a resource-rich attacker (e.g., a state-sponsored actor) may employ a set of clients C = {c1, . . . , c N },orchestrated as a botnet or C2 infrastructure. The attacker partitions the necessary set Q into disjoint subsets such that: 

Q =

> N

[

> i=1

Qci with ∀i : |Qci | < ϵ. (2) where, ϵ is a critical threshold below which the statistical significance for the calculation of M is not satisfied (e.g., the minimum sample size required by tests such as Shapiro-Wilk [17]). As long as each individual client ci operates below this threshold, the overall attack Q remains invisible to the defender, as there is no global correlation of events D(Qci ).

B. Attack Vector 1: Spatial Distribution (round-robin) 

To effectively counteract the SCA, we implement adeterministic distribution strategy. Instead of distributing requests randomly, we use round-robin [18] scheduling across 

K clients. Let qt be the request at time t > 0. The assignment to a client ci is done by: 

Client (qt) = c(t mod N ). (3) This strategy maximizes the time interval ∆t between two requests from the same client. For defense-side analyses based on temporal correlations, the data stream of each individual client appears sparse and unsuspicious. For mechanisms such as PRADA, which require a minimum number of requests (e.g., 100 in [6]) to achieve statistical significance, this distribution strategy ensures that the detection mechanism is never initiated (see evaluation in Section VI). 

C. Attack Vector 2: Temporal Obfuscation (Traffic Mixing) 

Even if a defense aggregates all incoming requests globally, a statistical approach remains vulnerable to manipulation. Adaptive attackers can mask their signature by mixing attack queries with benign traffic, as illustrated in Algorithm 1. The attacker generates a mixed data stream Qmix =

Qattack ∪ Qbenign . The ratio λ = |Qattack |/|Qbenign | is chosen such that the statistical distribution of the total traffic resembles that of a regular user. In Algorithm 1, this is achieved by including a predefined percentage of benign traffic in the stream of attack queries (lines 5-11). The algorithm subsequently alternates between different client identities using round-robin scheduling (lines 4, 7, and 10). In statistical tests, this implies that the null hypothesis (that the data is benign) can no longer be rejected. A defender attempting to compensate by tightening the thresholds would inevitably cause an increase in False Positives (FP), resulting in a de facto denial of service for legitimate users. The SCA represents a conceptual limitation in many proposed MEA defenses. The strategies described here show that defenses relying on per-client statistical thresholds fail when attackers distribute their malicious queries over multiple identities and obfuscate statistical patterns by mixing them with benign traffic. V. C ERBERUS AI: A FRAMEWORK FOR REPRODUCIBLE MODEL STEALING RESEARCH 

The systematic evaluation of the vulnerabilities outlined in Section IV requires an experimental environment that goes beyond a collection of standalone scripts. Existing research often suffers from isolated implementations that are difficult to compare. To address this gap, we introduce CerberusAI 1,

> 1https://github.com/lMaxTl/Cerberus-AI

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Traffic Mixing Strategy 

Require: Qattack (Queue attack queries) 

Require: Gbenign (Generator for benign traffic) 

Require: λ (Target mixing ratio, z.B. 0.99)  

> 1:

Clients ← { c1, . . . , c N } 

> 2:

P ointer ← 0 

> 3:

while Qattack ̸ = ∅ do  

> 4:

ccurr ← Clients [P ointer mod N ] 

> 5:

if unif orm (0 , 1) < λ then  

> 6:

q ← Gbenign .generate ()  

> 7:

send (ccurr , q ) ▷ Send benign traffic  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

q ← Qattack .pop ()  

> 10:

send (ccurr , q ) ▷ Send attack query  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

P ointer ← P ointer + 1  

> 13:

wait (∆ t) 

> 14:

end while 

a modular open-source framework specifically designed for red teaming of AI models and the simulation of complex, distributed attack scenarios. 

A. Architecture and Design Principles 

CerberusAI follows the principle of separation of concerns 

and strictly decouples the attack logic from the defense logic and the target model. The architecture, shown in Fig. 2, is based on three core components:  

> •

Declarative configuration: Experiments are defined entirely via YAML Ain’t Markup Language (YAML) files. This guarantees reproducibility, as all parameters from the target model and attack strategy to the defense hyperparameters are fixed in a version-controllable file.  

> •

Experiment Orchestrator: The ExperimentRunner dy-namically instantiates the required components using a factory pattern. It encapsulates the target model in a 

DefendedModel wrapper. This wrapper acts as a proxy that first routes each incoming request through the configured defense logic (e.g., PRADA) before it reaches the model. This realistically simulates an upstream Application Programming Interface (API) gateway or IDS.  

> •

Modular extensibility: A dynamic registry service allows new attacks or defenses to be added without modifying the core code. This enables the rapid integration of new threat vectors. 

B. Simulation of distributed threats 

A main component of CerberusAI is the DistributedAttack-Manager . This component enables the simulation of botnet-like structures within a controlled laboratory environment. Instead of instantiating a single attacker, the manager generates N

virtual client identities. The attack logic generates the required ExperimentRunner      

> DataHandler Defense
> Attack
> 1. AttackPhase
> Execute Phases
> 2. Normal User Simulation
> Visualization Export Results
> Plots & Graphs JSON, CSV, MD
> reads
> generates
> Target
> configures/
> enables
> Protected Environment
> initializes initializes
> config.yaml
> attacks
> Target Model Defense Logic
> Stolen Model

Fig. 2: Abstract flow of an experiment in CerberusAI: From the YAML definition to the orchestration of attack and defense to automated evaluation. adversarial queries, which are not sent directly but are instead passed to the manager. The manager implements various scheduling strategies to technically map the circumvention techniques described earlier in Section IV: 1) Round-Robin Scheduling: The global budget of attack requests Q is distributed cyclically among the clients 

c1, . . . , c N . This guarantees that no single client exceeds the local detection threshold (e.g., ϵ requests per minute). 2) Traffic Mixing Injection: To simulate adaptive attackers, the framework injects configurable benign traffic into the request stream. The parameter 

benign_query_percentage can be used to fine-tune the attack-to-noise ratio λ in order to test the sensitivity of global defense mechanisms (see Scenario 4 in Section VI). 

C. Declarative Experiment Definition 

A core goal of CerberusAI is reproducibility. Listing 1 shows an excerpt from the YAML configuration for adistributed attack. Researchers can specify complex scenarios without the need to implement additional code. 

D. Automated Evaluation and Metrics 

CerberusAI integrates a reporting pipeline. Upon completion of an experiment, the framework not only exports logs and tensors but also computes aggregated security metrics: 

   

> 1

attack_params:  

> 2

attack_type: "prada_attack"  

> 34

args:  

> 5

query_budget: 2500  

> 6

epsilon_mifgsm: 0.3  

> 7

benign_query_percentage: 0.99  

> 89

distributed_attack_manager:  

> 10

num_clients: 400  

> 11

coordination_strategy: "round_robin"  

> 12 13

phases:  

> 14

initial_benign_queries:  

> 15

type: "benign_simulation"  

> 16

num_fixed_queries: 500  

> 17 18

attack:  

> 19

type: "attack" #executes attack defined with attack_params  

> 20 21

post_attack_benign_queries:  

> 22

type: "benign_simulation" 

 

Listing 1: Configuration of a distributed attack with traffic mixing.  

> •

Attack Success Rate: Performance of the stolen substitute model relative to the target.  

> •

Detection Performance: Precision, recall, and F1 score of the defense mechanism.  

> •

Cost Analysis: Number of queries required to achieve a successful model extraction. Visualization modules automatically generate graphs showing the detection over time (see Section VI), enabling in-depth analysis of when and why a defense fails. VI. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

In this section, we empirically validate the theoretical assumptions about SCA, implemented by CerberusAI, using a set of experiments. The goal is to quantify the effectiveness of the defense mechanism PRADA against the defined distributed attack scenarios. 

A. Experimental Setup and Parameters 

We use MNIST as the benchmark dataset, as it is well established in MEA evaluation and enables direct comparison with the original PRADA publication [6]. The target model is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) achieving 98.4% test accuracy. We use the Momentum Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method (MI-FGSM) algorithm [19] as the attack strategy, as it exhibits a substantially higher transfer rate of adversarial examples in preliminary experiments compared to the I-FGSM used in PRADA. The configuration of the experiments is summarized in Table I. A critical detail of the defense is the parameter 

Nmin = 50 (min_set_size ), which specifies that statistical tests are performed only after an identity has issued at least 50 requests. (a) Scenario 1 (Baseline): Effective detection of a single attacker. The number of true positives (green) increases steadily. 

(b) Scenario 2 (Distributed): Total failure of defense. Round-robin keeps every client inconspicuous; only false alarms. 

(c) Scenario 3 (Global Defense): Aggregation of all clients makes the attack visible again (similar to baseline). 

(d) Scenario 4 (Adaptive): Explosion of false positives. Traffic mixing floods the system with false alarms (red). 

B. Scenarios and Results 

We examine four scenarios to explore the limitations of state-of-the-art defenses. Table II lists the quantitative results (precision, recall, F1 score) observed during experiments. 

1) Scenario 1: Baseline (Validation): We validate the functionality of the system in the single-client scenario: a single attacker pitted against the original client-based PRADA defense. With an F1 score of 63.2% and a precision of 100%, the defense behaves as expected: Attacks are detected as soon as sufficient ( Nmin = 50 ) data points have been observed. TABLE I: Configuration parameters of the experiments            

> Parameter Value / Description
> Target Model CNN (MNIST, 98.4% Acc)
> Attack Strategy MI-FGSM ( ϵ= 0 .3, Iter=60)
> Query Budget 2500 Queries (Total)
> Defense PRADA ( δ= 0 .90 )
> Defense Threshold Nmin = 50 (Queries per Client)
> Distributed Clients 400 (Round-Robin)

TABLE II: Breakdown of defense performance: While PRADA works in the single-client scenario, the detection rate drops to 0% in distributed attacks.                

> Scenario Precision Recall F1-score
> 1. Baseline (1 client) 100.0% 46.2% 63.2%
> 2. Distributed (400 clients) -0.0% 0.0%
> 3. Global Defense (400 Clients) 100.0% 83.1% 90.8%
> 4. Adaptive (Mixed Traffic) 1.0% 99.3% 2.0%

2) Scenario 2: The collapse of the SCA: In this scenario, we distribute the budget of 2,500 requests among 400 clients using round-robin. The result is consistent with the theoretical analysis in Section IV: the F1 score drops to 0.0%. Since each client sends only about 6-7 requests on average, the threshold 

Nmin = 50 is never reached. Statistical analysis is not initiated for any of the clients. This provides empirical evidence for the Fallacy of SCA discussed in Section IV: A defense that considers identities in isolation is blind to coordinated attacks. 

3) Scenarios 3 & 4: Limits of global aggregation: 

As a countermeasure, we implement a customized “Global PRADA” variant that aggregates requests across all identities. In scenario 3, this proves effective (F1 score of 90.8%), as the attack pattern becomes globally visible. However, scenario 4 (adaptive attacker) demonstrates the fragility of purely statistical approaches: The attackers mix their 2,500 malicious requests with a substantial amount of benign traffic (traffic mixing with a 99% benign share). The result is a drop in the F1 score to 2.0%. Although the recall remains high (the attacks are included in the set), the precision drops to approximately 1%. This means that 99 out of 100 alarms are false positives. Such a system is not operationally usable and is equivalent to a denial-of-service of the security infrastructure. The experiments show that the SCA is not a valid basis for security architectures in critical environments. The trivial circumvention by distributed attackers (scenario 2) and the vulnerability of global statistical methods to noise (scenario 4) underscore the need for deterministic, stateful analysis methods that detect attacks based on their semantic content rather than focusing exclusively on their statistical distribution. VII. C ONCLUSION 

Securing AI models against theft is a critical prerequisite for their deployment in military and security-critical domains. This work provides systematic evidence that the currently prevailing defense doctrine, based on statistical analysis of isolated clients (SCA), is likely to fail against modern, asymmetric threats. Our experiments demonstrate that Protecting Against DNN Model Stealing Attacks (PRADA), whose effectiveness is successfully validated under laboratory conditions with a single client, can be trivially bypassed in realistic scenarios. By orchestrating a botnet with 400 clients and a round-robin distribution strategy, the detection performance (F1 score) dropped to 0.0%. This empirically proves that SCA is not a valid assumption for model defense. In addition, it is shown that naive global aggregation approaches (global defense) help against simple distribution, but can be rendered operationally useless by adaptive attackers who mask their traffic with noise (“traffic mixing”) due to a flood of false positives (precision 

< 1% ). With CerberusAI, we are providing the research community with a tool to close this gap. The framework enables standardized and reproducible research on Model Extraction Attacks (MEAs) in distributed settings. Our findings establish two fundamental requirements for the development of resilient defense architectures: 1) Defense mechanisms should move away from purely statistical metrics (such as inter-arrival times or distribution matching), as these can be arbitrarily manipulated through distribution and noise. 2) Promising approaches for future research lie in stateful defenses, which monitor the state of the model globally, and in the semantic analysis of queries. Instead of asking “How fast are the queries coming in?”, future systems should consider the question “What information content do these queries extract in the context of global knowledge?”. Protecting intellectual property and tactical advantages in algorithmic warfare requires a paradigm shift: away from client-centric anomaly detection toward resilient, identity-independent model monitoring. REFERENCES [1] J. F. Loevenich, E. Adler, T. Huerten, and R. R. F. Lopes, “Design and evaluation of an Autonomous Cyber Defence agent using DRL and an augmented LLM,” Computer Networks , vol. 262, p. 111162, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111162 [2] J. F. Loevenich, E. Adler, T. H¨ urten, F. Spelter, D. Roncevic, and R. R. F. Lopes, “Automating Cyber Threat Intelligence and Attack Chain Generation using Cyber Security Knowledge Graphs and Large Language Models,” in 2025 International Conference on Military Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS) , 2025, pp. 1–10. [3] S. R. Soare, P. Singh, and M. Nouwens, “Software-defined defence: Algorithms at war,” The International Institute for Strategic Studies ,2023. [4] T. Orekondy, B. Schiele, and M. Fritz, “Knockoff nets: Stealing functionality of black-box models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2019, pp. 4954– 4963. [5] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. B. Celik, and A. Swami, “Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,” in 

Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security , ser. ASIA CCS ’17. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, p. 506–519. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3052973.3053009 [6] M. Juuti, S. Szyller, A. Dmitrenko, S. Marchal, and N. Asokan, “PRADA: Protecting against DNN Model Stealing Attacks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1805.02628, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805. 02628 [7] H. Chen, T. Zhu, L. Zhang, B. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhou, and M. Xue, “Queen: Query unlearning against model extraction,” Trans. Info. For. Sec. , vol. 20, p. 2143–2156, Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3538266 [8] Y. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Xuan, and Z. Zhao, “Model-guardian: Protecting against data-free model stealing using gradient representations and deceptive predictions,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) , 2025, pp. 1–6. [9] F. Tram` er, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Stealing machine learning models via prediction {APIs },” in 25th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 16) , 2016, pp. 601–618. [10] S. Pal, Y. Gupta, A. Shukla, A. Kanade, S. Shevade, and V. Ganapathy, “Activethief: Model extraction using active learning and unannotated public data,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 34, no. 01, pp. 865–872, Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/5432 [11] S. Kariyappa, A. Prakash, and M. Qureshi, “Maze: Data-free model stealing attack using zeroth-order gradient estimation,” 06 2021, pp. 13 809–13 818. [12] M. Tasumi, K. Iwahana, N. Yanai, K. Shishido, T. Shimizu, Y. Higuchi, I. Morikawa, and J. Yajima, “First to possess his statistics: Data-free model extraction attack on tabular data,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14857 [13] S. Zhou, T. Zhu, D. Ye, W. Zhou, and W. Zhao, “Inversion-guided defense: Detecting model stealing attacks by output inverting,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 19, pp. 4130– 4145, 2024. [14] Z. Bederna and T. Szadeczky, “Cyber espionage through botnets,” 

Security Journal , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 43–62, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41284-019-00194-6 [15] H. Yao, Z. Li, H. Weng, F. Xue, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “Fdinet: Protecting against dnn model extraction via feature distortion index,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11338 [16] G. S´ anchez, G. Elbez, and V. Hagenmeyer, “Attacking learning-based models in smart grids: Current challenges and new frontiers,” in 

Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems , 2024, pp. 589–595. [17] S. S. Shapiro and M. B. Wilk, “An analysis of variance test for normality (complete samples),” Biometrika , vol. 52, no. 3/4, pp. 591–611, 1965. [18] A. Silberschatz, P. B. Galvin, and G. Gagne, Operating System Concepts ,8th ed. John Wiley & Sons, 2008. [19] Y. Dong, F. Liao, T. Pang, H. Su, J. Zhu, X. Hu, and J. Li, “Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 9185– 9193.